\chapter*{Acknowledgements}

\initial{M}any persons offered or provided help and support during the timecourse of the PhD and it would be unrealistic to pretend that all could be acknowledged and thanked to an appropriate level. Nevertheless, I am trying out this conventional but frustrating exercise below.

I would first like to thank Pr. Céline Douilliez, Pr. Aymeric Guillot, Dr. Benjamin Alderson-Day, Dr. Maëva Garnier and Pr. Robert Hartsuiker for accepting to read and to examine the thesis, as well as for allowing me to present our research and to discuss it with them. Their thoughtful and intellectually diverse comments gave birth in my mind to many fascinating ideas that will haunt me for several years.

Very special thanks go to my supervisors, Dr. Hélène L\oe venbruck and Pr. Ernst Koster, as well as to my co-supervisor at Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Dr. Marcela Perrone-Bertolotti. Your expertise was invaluable in formulating the research topic. Besides your expertise, I would like to thank you for your availability and for being particularly supportive during the highs and lows of the PhD. You perfectly managed to balance the amount of guidance and autonomy needed to optimise my learning potential. Thank you Hélène for trying to alleviate the anxiety during the final steps of the PhD, this helped a lot.

I would like to thank all the funding agencies that contributed to the present work, the Université Pierre-Mendès France, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, the CNRS, Ghent University, and the FWO.

Thanks to Monica Baciu, Elsa Spinelli, Claire Leroy, Guylaine Omnes-Sabardak, Karima Domingues, Anne Guérin, Caroline Zala, Rudi de Raedt, and Wouter Bosmans for their help and flexibility in setting-up this joint PhD.

On a more practical note, I would like to thank David Meary for his essential help with programming the eye-tracking pretest experiment presented in Appendix B. Thanks to Coriandre Vilan, Marion Dohen and Maëva Garnier for their help during the recording of the relaxation used in Chapters 3 and 4. Of course, thanks to Nathalie Vallée for accepting to record these relaxation tapes. Thanks to Marc Chanove, the Maison des Sciences de l'Homme-Alpes (MSH) and the SCREEN platform for their help during the installation of the EMG experiments. Thanks to Rafael Laboissiere for his precious help in understanding mixed (multilevel) modelling at the beginning of my PhD journey. In the same vein, thanks to the participants of the #Bayesian journal club (e.g., Julien, Sylvain, Fabrice, Brice, Violette, Thierry) for your enthusiasm. Thanks to Sylvain Harquel for (amongst other things) providing support while setting-up the born-dead TMS experiment. Thanks to Chris Baeken and Sara de Witte for their help in designing and preparing this TMS experiment. Thanks to Sonja Banjac for the amazing work you did during your master degree internship on the EMG experiment presented in Chapter 4. Thanks to Maud Grol and Kim Rens for your help with the articulatory suppression study presented in Chapter 7.

Thanks to the many collaborators that turned the PhD into an exceptionnal learning adventure. Thanks to Romain Grandchamp for your expertise, your kindness, your sense of humor and your enthusiasm. Thanks to Paul Bükner for you expertise, your enthusiasm, and your availability. Thank you for accepting to write the tutorial paper on brms that is presente in the Appendices. It was also a great pleasure to welcome you in Ghent to give a doctoral course. Thanks to Cédric Batailler for your enthusiasm and your help in programming stuffs. Thanks to Céline Baeyens for your expertise, your wisdom, and your kindness. Thanks to Thierry Phénix for your enthusiasm and for accepting my offer to create a brand new doctoral course. This has been a demanding but rewarding experience.

Thanks to Chris Moulin for yout precious support all throughout the PhD but especially for your proofreading and moral support. I would also like to thank all past and present colleagues at the LPNC in Grenoble. Thanks to PhD students and colleagues for sharing an office, a meal, a discussion or a football match. Thanks to Violette for being such a nice office mate. Thanks to Alexia, Audrey, Lisa, for your enthusiam and for the many drinks and coffees essential to survive the morning teaching. Thank you Audrey and Lisa for following me abroad for conferences. Thanks to Svetlana, for your kindness and your support. Your unshakeable willingness to engage in metaphysicial discussions means a lot to me. I would also like to thank colleagues from Ghent. Thanks to PANLAB colleagues, Elien, Lien, Jasmine, Nathan, and Malvika for your help and your kindness when I arrived in Belgum. Thank you Kristof for being such a nice office mate, for your rigour and your sense of humour (these are indredibly hard qualities to combine). Thank you Ivan for the warm welcome when I arrived in Ghent, for your enthusiasm and your friendship. Thank you for the stimulating Meehlian discussions and for tolerating my political ramblings. Thank you Antonio for your wisdom and your sense of humor. You also deserve a special thank for tolerating my ramblings about society. I would also like to adress some thanks to the courageous team of Dutch learners. Thank you Justine, Maria, and Andres for the mutual support during the Dutch classes and for sharing drinks or climbing sessions.

Special thanks to the Walden III Slowpen Science Laboratory for providing a safe and intellectually stimulating place to wander aside academia. I am deeply indebted to Amélie, Bertrand, Brice, and Yseult (in an inclusive alphabetic order) for your support and for your sustained friendship. Amélie and Brice, it has been a great pleasure and honour to having you as colleagues both inside and outside academia.

Thanks to my friends outside academia, for being present despite the unavoidable distance established by four years of PhD. Lisa, Florian, Kévin, Clara, Corentin, your multiform and sustained loving support during the last few years was pure gold.

Charlène, thank you for your essential support during the last bit of the PhD. Thank you for your discernment, your kindness, your amazing pep talks, and for your love. Clearly you deserved that I rewrite my acknowledgements section...

Finally, I would like to thank my parents, Claire and François. Thank you for your unconditional support throughout my studies. It has been a sinuous path and I probably would have missed a few turns without your loving support.

\clearemptydoublepage
